# 01.22.2022 - Rust/Notes about Vector and memory allocation

A Vector in Rust is fundamentally a (pointer, capacity, length) triplet. For example, a `Vec<Char>` containing two elements `'a'` and `'b'`, with the capacity of 4, can be visualized as the following diagram:

```
            ptr      len  capacity
       +--------+--------+--------+
       | 0x0123 |      2 |      4 |
       +--------+--------+--------+
            |
            v
Heap   +--------+--------+--------+--------+
       |    'a' |    'b' | uninit | uninit |
       +--------+--------+--------+--------+
```

The **pointer** will always be pointed to the head of contiguous elements allocated on the heap.

The **capacity** of a Vector is the amount of space allocated for any future elements that will be added to that Vector.

If the Vector's length exceeds the capacity, more space will be allocated to increase the capacity, but all the Vector's elements will need to be **reallocated**. This can be slow, so creating a Vector with some capacity beforehand is always recommended.

When you create a Vector with `Vec::new`, `vec![]` or `Vec::with_capacity(0)`, the capacity will be 0. The Vector will not allocate until new elements are pushed into it.

A Vector **will never automatically shrink itself**, even if it's empty. This is to ensure there are no unnecessary allocations and deallocations. If you wish to free up unused memory, use [`Vec::shrink_to_fit`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html#method.shrink_to_fit) or [`Vec::shrink_to`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html#method.shrink_to).

When a Vector is dropped, there is **no guarantee on the order** of which element will be dropped first.

`Vec::push` and `Vec::insert` will never allocate/reallocate if the capacity is sufficient. And it only happens when `len == capacity`. On the other hand, bulk insertion methods like `Vec::append` may reallocate even when it's not necessary.

