# 02.27.2022 - Reading Notes/Good and Bad Procrastination

**Article:** http://www.paulgraham.com/procrastination.html

Procrastination is often seen as bad behavior that prevents us from achieving anything productive, but is it really that bad?

The author makes a point that **it's impossible to cure procrastination**, so, the big deal is **not how to avoid procrastination**, but **how to procrastination well**.

According to Paul, when you find yourself procrastinating (not working on something that matters), there are actually 3 types of procrastination:

- You work on **nothing** -> Bad procrastination
- You work on something **less important** -> Bad procrastination
- You work on something **more important** -> Good procrastination

Bad procrastination, for most of the time, is just errands that give you some fake productive feeling, to avoid the real work. Good procrastination is where you actually get some real work done.

To accomplish any **real work**, you need **a big chunk of time** and **the right mood**.

Blindly working on errands will kill your mood and waste time (or even cost more time).

It's very easy to fall into bad procrastination because they give us an **immediate reward** (or short-term reward) since good procrastination takes time, energy and mostly gives an **unforeseen reward**.

If you found yourself constantly dealing with bad procrastination, maybe you could try this: Trick yourself into getting work done.

-> By working on small things, that could grow into big things.
-> Or share the work with your collaborators.

The ultimate goal is: Let delight pull you instead of making a to-do list to push you.

---

**Conclusion:** Well, I can't say this article tells me anything new, these ideas are quite popular and easily find on the internet. But I like how the author draws a line between good and bad procrastination, and the idea that we can actually use procrastination as a tool to get things done (and leave the should-be-undone things undone).