# 03.30.2022 - TypeScript/How some utility types are implemented

TypeScript provides several [utility types](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/utility-types.html) to help us manipulate types easier, like: `Partial<T>`, `Required<T>`, `Pick<T, Keys>`,...

Internally, these types are implemented in the **src/lib/es5.d.ts**, at the [type level](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/types-from-types.html). And their implementation details are very interesting.

## Prerequisites: Mapped Type

A mapped type is a generic type that iterates through the keys of another type, to create a new type. For example:

```typescript
type AllBoolean<Type> = {
    [Key in keyof Type]: boolean
}
```

The `keyof` keyword returns a union of all the keys inside a type, we then use the index signature syntax to iterate through these keys, map them with the `Boolean` type, the end result is a new type containing all the keys of `Type`, with the type `Boolean`.

Later on, we can use this `AllBoolean` type like this:

```typescript
type Foo = {
    name: string;
    age: number;
}

type BoolFoo = AllBoolean<Foo>;
//    ^? {
//         name: boolean,
//         age: boolean,
//       }
```

For more details about mapped types, please read the [TypeScript Handbook: Mapped Types](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/mapped-types.html).

## Types Impelementations

Now, let's go over some of the utility-type implementations. Most of them are created using mapped type.

### The Partial\<T\> Type

The `Partial<T>` type takes a type `T` and makes all of the fields in `T` optional. Here's how `Partial<T>` is implemented:

```typescript
type Partial<T> = {
    [P in keyof T]?: T[P];
};
```

It mapped all the field `P` of `T` into the type `T[P]` (which means, get the type of `P` as defined in `T`). But also added a `?` modifier for each of the fields.

The `?` modifier indicates that the field is optional.

### The Required\<T\> Type

Opposite from `Partial<T>` is `Required<T>`, which makes all the fields of type `T` become required. It was implemented as:

```typescript
type Required<T> = {
    [P in keyof T]-?: T[P];
};
```

The way it works is almost identical to how `Partial<T>` works, except this time, it removes the optional `?` modifier with the `-?` operator.

When the optional modifier is removed from a field, that field becomes required.

### The Readonly\<T\> Type

The `Readonly<T>` type makes all the properties in `T` become read-only, it does so by annotating each field with the `readonly` keyword while mapping:

```typescript
type Readonly<T> = {
    readonly [P in keyof T]: T[P];
};
```

### The Pick\<T, K\> Type

Now, this one has much more to talk about. The `Pick<T, K>` type takes a type `T` and returns a new type that only has the fields defined in the union `K`. It is implemented as:

```typescript
type Pick<T, K extends keyof T> = {
    [P in K]: T[P];
};
```

First, for the type parameters, the list of keys `K` is defined as:

```typescript
K extends keyof T
```

This means, `K` is a union that only contains the fields inside the type `T`, so we cannot pass some arbitrary values in here, because it would cause a problem during the mapping phase.

Next, we will iterate through the keys in `K` and map to the corresponding field found in the type `T`.

### The Exclude\<T, U\> Type

The `Exclude<T, U>` type is used to make sure `T` will never be any type that is assignable to `U`. It does so by checking if the type `T` is extendable to `U`, returns a `never` type, otherwise, return the type `T` itself:

```typescript
type Exclude<T, U> = T extends U ? never : T;
```

This means, `U` can be anything, a primitive type or a union. This type is very interesting because it can be used as a building block for other types, for example: `Omit<T, K>`.

### The Omit\<T, K\> Type

As the name implies, the `Omit<T, K>` is a reversed version of `Pick<T, K>`, it removes all the fields defined in `K` from the type `T`, with the help of `Exclude<T, K>`:

```typescript
type Omit<T, K extends keyof any> = Pick<T, Exclude<keyof T, K>>;
```

This type can be interpreted step by step:

- First, create a type `U` that is a union of every field in type `T`, which is not assignable to anything in type `K`:
  
    ```typescript
    type U = Exclude<keyof T, K>
    ```

    By doing this, we are able to remove all the fields in `T` that is assignable to `K`.

- Finally, since `U` only contains the fields that are not found in `K`, we can pick them:
  
  ```typescript
  type Result = Pick<T, U>
  ```

### The ReturnType\<T\> Type

OK, I know you are starting to get a headache already. This is the last one, I promise. The `ReturnType<T>` type is used to get the return type of a function type, this one is interesting:

```typescript
type ReturnType<T extends (...args: any) => any>
    = T extends (...args: any) => infer R ? R : any;
```

Whoa, there's a lot going on here.

First, the input type parameter of this type means, we take a type `T` that has the shape of a function:

```typescript
T extends (...args: any) => any
```

In the implementation, we use a conditional type to check if the return type of function type `T` can be inferred or not, and call the inferred type here is `R`:

```typescript
T extends (...args: any) => infer R
```

If it is, we return the inferred type `R`, otherwise, it can be anything, hence, `any`.