# 01.18.2022 - Rust/Lifetime Elision Rules

Before Rust 1.0, writing code that returns a reference without any lifetime annotation wouldn't compile. Because Rust does not know what's the lifetime of the returned reference:

```rust
// 🚫 would not compile
fn first_word(s: &str) -> &str { ... }

// ✅ compile
fn first_word<'a>(s: &'a str) -> &'a str {
```

In later versions, the Rust compiler can automatically analyze and figure out the lifetime. It is called **lifetime elision** and is based on a set of rules. For now, these rules are applied for the `fn` and `impl` blocks. In the future, more elision rules will be added.

In a function, lifetimes on the parameters are called **input lifetimes**, and lifetimes on the return values are called **output lifetimes**.

If the lifetimes are not explicitly annotated, the compiler will try to apply these three rules:

- Each parameter that is a reference gets its own lifetime parameter, for example:

  ```rust
  fn foo(first: &str)
  // is equivalent to
  fn foo<'a>(first: &'a str)

  fn foo(first: &str, second: &Bar)
  // is equivalent to
  fn foo<'a, 'b>(first: &'a str, second: &'b Bar)
  ```

- If there is exactly one input lifetime parameter, that lifetime is assigned to all output lifetime parameters:

  ```rust
  fn foo(first: &str) -> &str
  // is equivalent to
  fn foo<'a>(first: &'a str) -> &'a str
  ```

- If there are multiple input lifetime parameters, but one of them is `&self` or `&mut self`, the lifetime of `self` will be assigned to all output lifetime parameters:

  ```rust
  fn foo(&self, first: &str) -> &str 
  // is equivalent to
  fn foo<'a, 'b>(&'a self, first: &'b str) -> &'a str
  ```

If all of the above rules are satisfied, you are good to go. If the compiler fails to apply any of the above rules, it will stop and show a compile error, asking you to annotate the lifetime yourself.

For example, in the following function, there are two lifetime parameters `'a` and `'b`:

```rust
// 🚫 would not compile
fn split<'a, 'b>(source: &'a str, delimiter: &'b str) -> &??? str
```

In this case, the compiler could not figure out the output lifetime, so it will show a compile error.

